20180101
OUROBOROS
Ouroboros: An Edenic Theory of Seeming
I want to set out a new terminological framework of Edenic seeming that will clarify/complicate the relationship between the self, the world, and the self's experience of the world--a relationship that I propose is circular, autological, and eternal, rather than linear, heterological, and time-bound. 
I say a terminological framework because its primary contribution is not one of ideological delineation but of grammatical contortion and redefinition, a noun-ing and verb-ing. You could make (and others have made) my central argument--that the self is the world is the experience of the world--without these superficial innovations; nonetheless, I hope my efforts will help cast new and strange light on questions of ontology, metaphysics, and epistemology, particularly as seen in the Biblical account of man's fall from grace: Adam (self) eats (experiences) apple (world). 
Framing
Now to the invention at hand, the neat trick: to grant transitivity where there is none.  
The apple seems good. 
Seems functions here as a linking verb, a qualified is. Implicit in declaring something seems a certain way is the acknowledgement that it may not in fact be that way. For the game's sake, let's (a)void the risk of proprioceptive fallibility.
To seem is henceforth to eat, as Adam does his apple. This is not simply the mechanical eating of jaw and tongue, nor is it the optic eating of packets of light, nor is it the eating of haptic surface or sonic wave. It is all of these eaten together: an active, involuntary consumption of the world as sensation (although, as we will soon see, seeming is as much creation as it is consumption). 
Adam seems the fruit. 
He takes in qualia; he calls them apple. He ought not, but he must. As the proto-self, Adam seems the fate of man, a seeming enacted always and ever. Note here it does not matter that the Apple (from now on used interchangeably with World [the glistening sphere, the seemed object]) may only be a dreaming--all that matters is the seeming. I (read: Adam, self, seemer) do not know the nature of the object I am eating. It may or may not "exist"--world qua World. I can only know this: that I am eating it. What "I" am, what "it" is, what exactly is meant by this "eating" may be debated. But the experiential sensations of my eating are undeniable, self-evident, and known. Seeming seems. 
So what have we done? We have made ourselves eaters and seemers of the World as seemed object. Now, with this definitional frame in place, we turn our attention to the three questions hinted at above: 
What is the seemed (world, apple) 
What is the seemer (self, Adam) 
What is the seeming (experiencing, eating) 
The questions are three, but I propose the answer is one namely, Seeming Eternally Seemed. To demonstrate, I offer a series of thought experiments, each corresponding to a question posed.  
Question 1
For this thought experiment, you must first seem an object. A cup, a book, a grain of salt. You apprehend it, take it in; it is seemed. Now, turn away and--in your mind--return the object to its unseemed state. By this I do not mean simply forgetting the object or "cropping it out." To unseem the object, you must imagine it was never seemed. Can you do it? No. For if you unseem the object, you must also unseem your attempts to do so. Follow it back and you must ultimately unseem yourself and the very World. This leads us to two conclusions. First: 
All objects are seemed objects. 
Were an object unseemed, you would not have seemed it. And had you not seemed it, how do you know of it? There is no world but that of experience. Second: 
A seemed object is seemed always. 
In other words, to eat the apple is always to have been eating it. Were it otherwise, it would not be as it is.   
Question 2
Next, we turn our attention to the seemer. 
Imagine if you will, every part of yourself swapped out slowly in the manner of Theseus's ship. Identical limbs, an identical brain--everything different but the same. Do you seem yourself to yourself, or are you Other? If you answer Other, you lie, for the Other would not know itself as such. If you answer Yourself, you lie, for there is evidently no inherent self-object to call your own. This leads us to a third conclusion: 
The seemer is not an object 
Which is to say, the Seemer is Subject. Subject to what? To seeming. And what is seeming? It is that which the Seemer does. The verb which proves the noun. Adam adams. The seemer seems. 
Question 3
We come now to our final thought experiment: to seem an object without reference to yourself as seemer. You go about it thusly: isolation of object in space, reduction to pieces, blocking-up of gaps between. 
But you find you cannot conceive the thing wholly--only this side or that. The seemed remains situated always toward and against the seemer. To eat the apple is to eat it in relation. We finally must declare that: 
The seemer seems itself always as seeming 
And what does this yield? Nothing and everything. Recall, objects are seemed always by the seemer, which is subject. However, in seeming, the seemer seems doubly (as in a mirror), rendering itself Subject-Object.  
What does it seem in the mirror of the World? Not itself, but itself seeming itself: an uncaused causing. In eating, Adam generates the object of his eating. Through experience, the self creates the World (paradise tainted).  
This at the last is Seeming Eternally Seemed: the apple and the man, the serpent and his tail.
