20191101
ANIMAL THEOLOGY
Chapter 5 
Linzey uses Anne Rice s Interview with a Vampire as an entry point into metaphorical exploration of the parasitical relationship that exists between mankind and the natural world. Objectors might appeal to the beauty of nature and natural law as a sufficient basis for moral action an ecological theology if you will. However, Linzey counters that there exists a critical distinction between the Creator and His creation. To make inferences about the divine nature of the former from the fallen nature of the latter is to obviate the need for redemptive action, and thereby to reinforce the brutality that pervades  natural  cycles of consumption and vampiric feeding, pitting the lion against the lamb in direct contradiction of the Isianic vision. In other words, a rehabilitation of natural law and the state of nature is necessary by way of a new trans-natural moral imperative that entails an active striving against our fallen tendencies. Like Rice's Louis, we must grapple with the deep-seated sense that something is not right, despite the insistence of the Lestats of the world that the blood of the weaker is rightfully ours for the taking. We modern westerners are particularly without excuse given the fact that there are viable alternatives available to us (vegetarianism, veganism, etc). Simply put, Christ as eschatological figure and not simply as first-century Palestintian man represents a possibility of global, even universal transformation of the parasitic paradigm. To simply resign ourselves to our fallenness is unacceptable.
Chapter 4 
With the publication of Gutierrez s A Theology of Liberation (1971), there was a widespread shift toward liberational modes of thought in theological discourse. Although this emergent school acknowledges the universal scope of Christ s redemptive work, its focus lies primarily upon the human being as the subject of liberation. Linzey argues that this reinforcement of orthodox humanocentrism is in direct opposition to the katabasis (sacrificial descent) that Christ displayed. A return to a sound Christology* demands an expansion of the liberational mindset to include the non-human realm. Linzey insists upon this point, despite objections that such a shift actually reinforces humanocentrism (by implying that that only humans can affect liberation for animals), inappropriately compares the plight of non-humans to humans (distinction without difference), and has absurdly far-reaching implications (does vegetable life deserve the same level of consideration? What about minerals? yes, with qualifications).
*Christ as 1. co-creator (the logos that undergirds reality), 2. god-incarnate (logos made flesh), 3. new covenant (the Noahic promise), 4. reconciler of ALL things (not just humans), and 5. moral exemplar (displaying a spirit of compassion for and submission to the weak)
Chapter 3 
Linzey refutes the orthodox notion of divine impassability (God as eternally unsuffering), arguing that the incarnational priesthood of Christ necessitates suffering as a redemptive catalyst for transformation of the fallen world through sacrificial acts, not the sacrificing of beast on altars of stone as in the OT but of one s own  flesh  (i.e. the conveniences that our privileged place in nature affords us) on the altar of consciousness, modelling Christ s compassion for and suffering on behalf of the world, even its least inhabitants. Though this framing of the divine nature borders on the heretical (see Patripassianism) Linzey claims, convincingly, that a moral or mystical theology of animals and our relationship to them is an unavoidable corollary of the benevolence revealed plainly in the god-man. We are thus called to become priests unto the world, to reenact Christ s sacrifice toward the weaker, not because they deserve it but precisely because they do not.
Chapter 1
Pr cis: we ought to have reverence toward all forms of life, human or non-human, insofar as they are expressions of divine grace and creative outpouring. This sense of reverence, rooted in love for the Creator, must necessarily extend outward toward His Creation as we fulfill our responsibilities not only toward one another as bearers of the imago dei, but toward all things which likewise bear the Maker s stamp, imbuing them with certain inalienable  rights,  rights that derive not from any attribute of the thing per se (e.g. sentience or rationality), but rather the divine origin of those attributes, infringement upon which is a boldfaced betrayal of the spirit of Christ s self-emptying on our behalf.