20201101
HAPPINESS
The modern quest for happiness is a Sisyphean exercise in futility. How can you achieve a state that you cannot define? 
You reply,  well I know happiness when I feel it. 
And under what conditions are those feelings produced? You may point to the hierarchy of needs: physiological, safety, belongingness, esteem, self-actualization. 
This, we are told, is where happiness resides in the fulfillment of our various needs. 
Very well. Let s examine fulfillment. To  fill  a thing implies that it was once empty. Given enough time, it will be empty again. 
To be  happy  then, is to be actively, dynamically fulfilling needs as they arise.
The cycle continues; there seems to be no point of ultimate achievement, at least, not on our plane of timebound, embodied existence. 
Given the cyclical relational interplay that exists between fulfillment and depletion (yin and yang), how can we hope to Proceed or Advance in any meaningful way? At what point in this cycle is happiness said to be attained and/or lost? What are the units, the system of measurement? How many needs must go unmet before one can be designated unhappy or vice versa? Where is the  fill line ?
You reply,  well you can t quantify a feeling in that way it s more subjective.  
This, of course, brings us back to the initial objection namely, that you cannot achieve that which you cannot define. 
Of course, defining human needs at the basic level is simple enough: food, shelter, clothing, etc. These needs are universal and constant across age, time, and culture.
But at the higher levels of belonging and actualization, we find ourselves unable to articulate or even conceptualize our needs caught in a muddle of often contradictory expectations, presuppositions, (pre)conceptions, and societal norms.
To make sense of it all, modern man relies largely on media, branding, and consumptive identity.  I m a [redneck, intellectual, activist]; thus, for me happiness/fulfillment looks like [cold beer/hot babes, cocktail parties/repartee, punk aesthetics/performative acts of social justice].  
The problem, of course, is that these prepackaged identities and their respective trappings and accoutrement do not always accommodate shifts in disposition or the vicissitudes of circumstance. What happens when you are no longer able to enact the identity you ve chosen or maintain the lifestyle that you ve come to associate with happiness?
Poor health, old age, bad luck, mistreatment at the hands of others there are any number of disruptive factors that can (and ultimately will) wrest the illusion of control from our grasp, rendering us existentially adrift.  
No matter what tack we take, no matter what technologies or philosophies we employ in our endeavors to guard against contingencies, the great boulder called Happiness will always slip from our grasp at the last moment, leaving us to wonder, to curse, to crave.  Is it something I did? Something I said? Is it providence, karma, dumb random chance? Why am I not happy despite it all? 
You are not happy, oh modern man, because you do not know what happiness is. 
You do not know what happiness is, oh modern man, because cannot identify your deepest need.
You cannot identify your deepest need, oh modern man, because and now at last we come to it you never needed anything at all. Or, put another way, the only thing you need is no-thing. This, in turn, is the key to every-thing.
Camus said,  One must imagine Sisyphus happy.  But that isn t quite right. The word, as we have seen, is too tired, too bankrupt, too freighted with imprecise connotations. Let us, instead, imagine Sisyphus Content. Accepting of.
This is what I propose Contentment and Acceptance, not happiness, as the state toward which one should allow himself to strive.
And how does one grant the allowance to strive? It is (as with everything [i.e. nothing]) a paradoxical co-accommodation, best conceived of as a triangulation: Passivity, Simplicity, Linearity. 
At the center of these three vertices lies the wellspring, the Is-ness, Was-ness, Yet to Be-ness, that runs through all things at all points always circumscribed and circumscribing, angular and ovular.
 So it is. So I am.  Acceptance, the manifold threefold. Elucidate:
?	Passivity 
?	Simplicity
?	Linearity
[to be continued ]
