20221101
THE LIGHTHOUSE
Short
Accidentally watched the lighthouse (2016) instead of the 2019 dafoe vehicle by the same name. apparently both films are inspired by the same real life tragedy that occurred in 1801 at the smalls lighthouse, where one of the keepers died in a freak accident and the other was forced to  keep the light  on his own, losing his sanity in the process. the 2016 film starts strong, with powerful performances from both actors; however, as it goes on it tests the endurance of the viewer as much as the benighted keeper, haunted by the stray arm of his companions dangling corpse,  beckoning him toward judgment. I suppose in this sense the film succeeds, relentless in its attack upon the viewers patience, sanity, dashing much of its symbolic potential upon the rocks of tedium and generic convention.

Long
Chris Crow s The Lighthouse (2016) is a psychological thriller based on the true story of two lighthouse keepers, Thomas Griffths and Thomas Howell, the former of whom dies in a freak accident while tending the Smalls Lighthouse during a weeks-long gale, leaving his guilt-wracked companion to keep the light alone. 
Rooted firmly in a sense of time and place (i.e. a remote and barren island off the coast of Wales in early-nineteenth century), the film sets out a grim and harrowing tale from the annals of maritime tragedy, with powerful performances from its two main actors Mark Lewis Jones as the salty, laconic Griffiths who worships no god but the sea, and Michael Jibson as the hapless, troubled Howell, whose negligence at his former post cost the lives of six sailors. 
Although the film lays itself out in commendably straightforward fashion, with little thematic or artistic pretension, there are moments of genuine brilliance, particularly in the first act as these two characters are forced to interact within the claustrophobic confines of the lighthouse quarters, coming to terms with the fact that they will likely die there as the storm sets in and grows in unabated fury, precluding the possibility of relief. Haunted by the strung-up corpse of the man he has not murdered (but for whose death he is sure to be blamed, as he was for the ill-fated 6), Howell begins a descent into madness that offers interesting (albeit poorly explored) metaphorical possibilities in  light  of the tower s precipitous ascent, the onslaught of the waves (unconscious depths, psychic tumult), the apparitional fogs, and the isolation of the film s setting.
And here is where a competent if slightly low-budget picture becomes an exercise in sheer endurance. I suppose, in this sense, the film could be said to succeed, launching as relentless an attack upon the viewer s sanity as that of the poor tormented Howell, but in the process, regrettably, it also dashes much of its symbolic potential upon the rocks of tedium and generic convention.
While Dave Egger s The Lighthouse (2019) bears on its surface a striking resemblance to Crow s earlier film of the same time (to an extent that some might call borderline plagiaristic), the two films could not be more different in terms of tone, cinematographic merit, and intended function. True, both films center on a pair of Toms (older and younger) tending to a lighthouse on a remote island, and true, both convey their subsequent descent into madness and the death of the principal keeper during an unrelenting storm, but the manner in which these events unfold and the way in which they are conveyed and framed are distinct, even antithetical.
Crow s Lighthouse is, as mentioned, rooted firmly in historical and geographical specificities, whereas Egger s operates on the higher plane of archetype: a troubled and rebellious Seeker holding forth with the old and mercurial Keeper on a timeless and placeless Island above which rises the Tower of Light, shot and framed in mythic style. 
The technical qualities of both films also bears mentioning here: while Crow s color picture features a grim and muted palette along with relatively conventional camerawork (as befits the harrowing simplicity of the thriller), Egger s allegorical opus boldly declares itself a masterpiece with carefully composed shots, portentous angles, and heavy use of shadow, further heightened by the film s (admittedly stunning) use of black and white.
This all-pervading sense of self-importance and self-awareness extends even and especially to the dialog, a cyclonic admixture of Biblical idiom and nautical jargon that is equal parts Old Testament prophet and Moby Dick, a fact humorously acknowledged in Howard s vitriolic rant against Wake s Neptunian pomposity, (which, come to think of it, might be read as sly pre-anticipation of any criticism against the film s  Captain Ahab horseshit. )
This actually brings me to one of my primary complaints about the film namely, its insistence upon puncturing or deflating the gravitas that it so masterfully cultivates with the occasional vulgarity, scatological reference, or crass insertion. The much-lauded  Hark!" monologue was, for me, one of the most problematic and jarring moments in the film, squandering boat loads of dynamic energy on so petty a thing as a squabble over culinary preference:  Alright, have it your way. I like your cookin . 
Through Crow s Lighthouse may at times bore the viewer,  it cannot be said to disrespect him. There is no fourth wall breaking, no tongues in cheeks, no sidelong winking. It tells the tale straight and in my opinion reasonably well, given the obviously limited budget.
Egger s film, on the other hand, is a well-funded endeavor brimming with talent, both directorial, technical, and thespian. I could go on at length, and I m sure some have, about the film s sound design, psychosexual evocations, mythic allusions, and metaphorical frameworks relative to Crow s (up vs. down, in vs. out) but for the purposes of this comparative review, I feel the need to point out and honestly, to condemn Egger s refusal to permit us the luxury of shock and awe. 
On this point, and this point alone, Crow s film is superior and I stand by that assessment.
