20221101
HANDLES*
Greek Stoic Epictetus spoke of a handle by which an event may be lifted, and a handle by which it cannot.
Put another way, every occurrence may be approached in one of two ways:
      as an infringing (of external upon internal) OR
      as an opening (for the internal to better understand or interact with the external)
If you miss the winning lottery ticket by one number you can see this as an infringing (of random chance upon your ordered desires) or as an opening (for you to better appreciate the absurdities of a world beyond your control).
Do not lift by the constraint, but by the constrainer. Rather than focusing on that which has been done or not done toward or against you, focus on the doer and your relationship to it.
Do not grasp the nearly won lottery by having been denied, grasp it by the denier chance or fate or the God-Who-Is-There a force or being to whom you owe all things, both your misfortunes and your fortunes.
Do not grasp the untimely termination of your employment by having been fired, grasp it by having been employed by an employer from whom things were learned and to whom a degree of thanks (however slight) is owed.
So says Epicetus. And so say I, with one notable qualification: 
Further examples:
      If I drop a glass on accident and become angry, what causes that anger? The anger comes from the fact there are external acting which constrain my ability to do what I want or to not do what I don t want. I m focused on the constraining, on my own subjectivity which is lacking.
      If I drop a glass and feel nothing, what causes my apathy? The apathy comes from the fact that that there is an internal lacking which precludes my ability to want anything insofar as I am nothing. I m focused on the lack of constraint
All this is well and good, Epictetus; however, I propose that there is a third handle, a third way Joint Use.
In other words, there is not one right handle and one wrong one, but rather two handles which must both be used in order to lift the object without spillage. 
[to be continued{?}]
