20221101
PARASITE & MY FAIR LADY
My fair lady and parasite
Recently, I watched two very different films and although not my intention at the outset I noticed a number of striking similarities and instructive differences that merit further exploration.
The films were Lerner and Loewe s 1964 musical My Fair Lady (based on Shaw s 1913 play Pygmalion) and Bong Joon Ho s 2019 thriller Parasite.
At first glance, these two films make an odd and counterintuitive pairing but closer inspection reveals many shared characteristics around perennially relevant themes, namely class, language, fate, and sex.
Turning first to class, the most obvious parallel between the two films is their treatment of high society versus low and the various means by which these distinctions/barriers are reinforced and transgressed.
In My Fair Lady, we have the ill-bred Eliza Doolittle, a flower girl in the slums of Covent Garden, and her good-for-nothing father, a dustman with a penchant for drink and little else. Then, across town, we have the cantankerous and highly regarded Professor Higgins, a philologist, linguist, and incorrigible misogynist with upper-class connections that he both loathes and takes for granted. 
While largely destitute, the Covent community is portrayed sympathetically, even idyllically, as a site of joviality, bonhomie, and good-natured ignorance. Eliza and her father are happy in their way. Then comes the Professor, a colonizing presence, who along with his chum Pickering set out on a lighthearted project of civilizing the feral Eliza, and elevating her to socioeconomic status through (and this will become important later on) language, diction, and elocution.
The project proves a success although, as Higgins learns, not entirely for the reasons he initially supposed. His introduction of a common flower girl to the upper crust of Edwardian London rests not on his ability to tame the wild Cockney tongue, but rather on Eliza s ability to adapt her lingual evolution being merely a manifestation of the internal strength both of her class and (it is implied) of her sex.
Similarly, Parasite centers on the socioeconomic tensions between lower class and upper, and attempts to navigate the two; however, in this gritty thriller, the protagonist is not a single character but a family, the Kims, who eke out a living folding pizza boxes and siphoning off their neighbors Wi-Fi (i.e. hijacking the network significant).
However, after finding themselves the recipient of a scholar stone and a tutoring opportunity with the wealthy Parks family the Kims  fortune begins to change as they find it remarkably easy to manipulate the  host  family and gradually infiltrate all of the principal positions the household staff in  parasitic  fashion.
As in My Fair Lady, there is clear delineation between the classes, both in terms of their external circumstance and their inner characteristics, but here in Parasite, we find no idealism, no idyllic portrayals of the underprivileged as a hardy, rollicking, vital bunch. Quite the contrary, poverty is conveyed in all of its squalor, its discomfort, its desperation. There are no spontaneous outbursts of song, no quaint bouquets to mask the stench.
Much like Eliza s semi-subterranean dwelling which we glimpse in an early scene, the Kims live in a tenement basement, and as we later find out the former housekeeper s husband has been kept in a hidden bunker for the past four years, dodging loan sharks.
The contrast of high and low, chthonic and solar, ascent and descent, is perhaps more readily apparent in Parasite, but can also be found in My Fair Lady as well, as stairways are mounted and descended in the lively dance of social (im)mobility that the film explores.
Where Eliza lightly dances, the Kims must scrabble and brawl. Both face obstacles and barriers to entry, but the nature of those barriers and the means by which they are overcome (or not) vary dramatically.
First off, in My Fair Lady, a means of upward access is benevolently (read: condescendingly) offered from above on a mercurial whim whereas the Kims must construct their own means of ascent through duplicity, violence, and coordinated effort.
That s not to say, however, that there is not an element of duplicity in My Fair Lady, for there is. In fact, the attempt to obscure or mask Eliza s origins and  pass her off  as the titular fair lady is in many respects the core conceit of the film. Can the leopard change its spots or, in this case, its voice? This is the primary barrier to entry that Shaw concerned himself with in the play on which the film is based  language. Determining the role that language plays in reinforcing and reifying social hierarchies is Higgin s life s work, laboring assiduously under the theory that the thin veil of accent, articulation, and presentation is the only thing separating the  guttersnipe  from the lady. 
He sets out to prove this with Eliza and partially succeeds, but fails insofar as his initial theory was predicated on the notion of language as merely lingual, a series of sounds uttered in such and such a way and not an expression of something fundamental, something extrasensory.
This is also tied up intimately with sex and sexual difference, yet another barrier that the film interrogates, and one that Higgins himself must overcome through, yes, language, but also deed ( Show Me ). When, in the final scene, he plays the recording of Eliza s voice in all its vulgar glory, he is not simply hearing the mispronunciation and crass elisions, he is hearing the woman herself, seeing her face, feeling the presence to which he s grown so gradually and imperceptibly accustomed.
In this sense, My Fair Lady seems to suggest that language is both an obstruction and the means by which said obstruction may be cleared not language as sound, but language as love a trite observation, but a true(?) one.
Language is also a employed as a mechanism of upward mobility in Parasite (e.g. the Kim daughter using a cursory Google search to quickly internalize and regurgitate pseudo-psychological mumbo jumbo that lends her an air of legitimacy and allows her to secure the position as art therapist for the troubled Park boy); however, attempts at linguistic gap-bridging break down quickly in the face of the disastrous exigences that soon arise, giving way instead to the universal language of violence (e.g. the harrowing climax in which the Kim girl and Mr Park are murdered during a birthday party).
Ultimately, the primary barrier that holds the Kim family back is not that of sound, but that of smell. From the opening shot of socks drying in the basement window to the closing shot of the same, Parasite is full of visual and diegetic touches that invoke the olfactory sense, usually toward revulsion.
Much is made of the  line  that separates the Park family from its staff, and Mr. Park in particular is insistent on this line not being crossed. While complimentary of Mr. Kim s skill as a driver/chauffeur and his ability to navigate the implicit boundaries without any verbal transgression, he complains that his peculiar odor (like radishes or  old rags that have been boiled ) does in fact cross the line. His wife later stops her nose and cracks the window. Even the Park s son comments upon the scent, noting the similarity of Mr. Park and Mrs. Park s miasma, threatening to undo their whole operation. 
During the climactic party scene, it is Mr Park s visible revulsion at the smell of his former housekeeper s husband who has unbeknownst to him been a loyal resident of the house for nigh on half a decade, that Mr. Kim snaps and plunges the knife into his host s back, a suicidal act given that he himself is a parasitic member of the  biome of affluence. 
Smell and sound both are sensory points of slippage in this pair of films that beckon toward class difference as the internalization of superficial externalities externalities that manifest as codified bodies of social practice.
In My Fair Lady, there are strict codes of conduct that Eliza must learn to abide by before she can be ushered in as a member of the privileged elite. In Parasite,  code  instantiates not simply as behavioral expectations on the horizonal plane but also as a system of vertical communication, exchanged in the form of dots and dashes. The flickering lights that the housekeeper s former husband uses to express his unacknowledged gratitude to Mr. Park is also, ironically, the same mechanism that Mr. Kim uses to make contact with his son after taking refuge in the very same bunker, a way of collapsing and signaling across distance. 
Codes, rules, and roles are bound up in one another across both films, but particularly in My Fair Lady, where Eliza must master a set of seemingly arbitrary guidelines in order to  play the role  convincingly. Each member of the Kim family also assumes at various points in the film an identity that is not their own with an eye toward  inhabitation  of and resettlement within the Parks household (which, suggestively, was designed by a famous architect, yet another gesture toward artifice). 
The idea of resettlement or forced relocation is particularly compelling in light of the young Park s boy obsession with Native American culture. Both films investigate to various degrees the relations between colonizer and colonized, with Eliza undergoing forced reeducation under the hegemonic tutelage of Professor Higgins, and the Parks (particularly Mr. Park) being forced to engage in playfully appropriative reenactments of violence perpetrated by and against the native, an implicit stand in for the subjugated masses on whose backs the privileged few stand.
We ve already discussed the significance of ascent and descent within these socioeconomic frames of reference, but there is also an element of forward and backward motion i.e. the transportational means by which class is reinforced and appropriate distances maintained.
When Eliza first makes her way to Professor Higgins  abode for an unannounced parlay, she does so by taxi, a luxurious mode of travel that causes considerable wonder among her fellow lowlifes back in Covent Gardens. After her transformation into lady, she returns in the same mode of conveyance. In Parasite, also, vehicular transportation functions as a symbol for power relations operating  beneath the hood  of cosmetic decorum. Mr Kim may be at the wheel, but he does not dictate where the car goes. His agency is derivative of and subordinate to the passenger s will.
Later as he and his children make their late-night escape from the Park residence, having just avoided detection after their hosts return early from a thwarted camping trip, they must make their way home barefoot in the rain.
Upon arriving, the discover that their basement dwelling has been flooded with sewage water, once again evoking the sense of olfactory disgust and germophobic privilege of the viewing audience. The toilet becomes a site of reverse excretion, a spewing upward, a seeping out. This unsanitary deluge is foreshadowed by the drunk man urinating outside the Kim s home near the beginning of the film, positioning the human as a product of its own waste, emitting a foul stench that must be cleansed through psychosocial ablution (see, for contrast, the comical bath scene in Lady).
Of course for every output (feces, urine, the unhygienic Mass) there is input (nutritive substance, genetic material). Parasite also deals heavily with consumption and ingestion both in the material and metaphysical sense.
Food figures heavily in several key scenes, not least of which is the Kims  brief period of reckless indulgence/imbibery in the Park s absence. Then there is the notable detail of the bunker s entranceway, hidden as it is behind a well-stocked pantry shelf a bounty inaccessible to the prisoners of poverty below. Finally, there is the birthday cake, a treat which the young Park boy is illicitly enjoying under cover of darkness when he encounters the ghost or apparition that, in point of fact, is merely the former housekeeper s husband ascending from the bunker for the same purpose.
Traumatized by this incident, the eccentric and coddled Park boy is thought to have some sort of early onset schizophrenia, a fear that the Kim girl preys upon with her speculative diagnoses as the boy s pseudo-therapist.
In My Fair Lady, food functions less as a necessity withheld and more as an enticement proffered. Using her hunger against her (specifically her penchant for treats, an infantilizing detail that could perhaps offer parallels to the bunker dweller s regressive bottle-feeding and banana-eating), Professor Higgins dangles the prospect of limitless chocolates before Eliza as an incentive to serve as experimental subject in his wager, later appealing to this exploitive transaction as evidence of good treatment.
Later on, as her basic needs are met, the offer of chocolate no longer serves as sufficient enticement, having been made aware of higher needs, emotional needs, as of yet unfulfilled.
It is in this dimension, the emotional dimension, that she becomes the familiar ghost that haunts Professor Higgins  austere and sexless life, leaving with her feigned departure an emptiness that no gramophone recording or scholarly pastime could fill.
Thus we see in both films Hunger and Apparition acting as dual manifestations of basic human impulses across carnal and metaphysical axes.
While transgression of this axis does occur, it s not through lack of enforcement. In Parasite, enforcement comes both from within (the former housekeeper s video evidence of the Kims deceit) and without (the investigative and legal measures taken to apprehend and penalize the Kims for their crimes).
In Lady, Zoltan Karpathy plays the prosecutorial part, in an attempt to wrest Eliza of her mask and expose her as the poseur he suspects her to be. In this sense, he functions as a kind of exterminator, intent on ridding old money of its parasitic hangers-on (one of which, ironically, he himself is). Beyond the name, Joon-Ho's film gestures toward this parasitic relationship in many ways, most notably in one of its early scenes, where the windows are left cracked as an insect-repelling spray truck passes in hope of ridding the basement dwelling of its stink bug infestation (again, smell).
In both cases, the protagonists  ability or failure to escape extermination, detection and/or incrimination is reliant upon two key factors: fortune/luck and rhetorical/choreographic skill.
Turning first to fortune, we ve already mentioned the symbolic significance of the scholar s stone as a supposed portent of fortune; ironically, it is this very stone which the former housekeeper s husband uses as a blunt instrument to bash the Kim boy s head in. 
Significantly, the boy s injury at the hands of the crazed basement dweller (and the family s initial encounter with the former housekeeper and her husband in the bunker, during which they are held hostage by way of extortion) can be credited to a moment of slippage on the dank stairway. The notion of slipping, letting the mask fall away, is as we ve seen present in both films.
In Lady, slippage is also an ever-present reality, but  with a little bit of luck,  a positive outcome is guaranteed and with this as his motto, Eliza s father freeloads his way through life, not a care in the world.
The Kims are also the beneficiaries of many lucky turns during their meteoric rise to success, but ultimately, they are undone by the very blind luck on which they ve grown to depend ( The best plan is not to have one,  says Mr Park to his son during their stay in the crisis shelter, post-flood).
The scholar s stone serves its master, so to speak, and while the Kim s do derive transitory benefits from possession thereof, they are ultimately crushed under the weight of accumulated wealth that the stone represents (stratification, the  upper crust ). The term  scholar s stone  is of interest here, with the academic connotations of the name and its bestowal from the hands of a university student. In Lady as well, it is the well-educated Professor who  gifts  the heavy instrument (here figured as language and the ponderous tome) to undeserving hands Eliza may fling her slippers in retaliation, the Kims may plunge their knives, but what are they against the weight of privilege, wealth, and refinement?
This leads us to the second factor by which upward mobility is determined: rhetorical skill and one s ability to exploit the system s moral elasticity through choreographies of language.
At first, the Kim s prove themselves more than capable of manipulating the refined naivete of the Park family to their own advantage through keen observation, tireless rehearsal, and coordinated execution. They are not bad people, as such, but they feel compelled by circumstance to engage in morally dubious acts, justifying these actions through rationalization (as the Kim boy says after forging a diploma,  I just printed it out early ), appeals to inequity (Mrs. Kim:  I d be nice too if I were rich ) or though outright denial of moral system (in Mr. Kim s words,  None of it fucking matters ).
However, despite their moral acrobatics and choreographies, their failure to account for certain contingencies and eventualities ultimately proved to be their undoing, just as the mysterious workings of sexual relation detonated the Professor s fa ade of invulnerability, revealing a phonetic substrate deeper than that of mere vocality a language of the heart, the lines between the lines.
As a musical, Lady lends itself more readily to the choreographic readings, with elaborate numbers, sets, and dances intended to evoke certain emotions and set certain tones that propel the narrative forward. 
These visual choreographies are reflected in the rhetorical routines that Higgins rehearses in his study as he, quite skillfully, attempts to plug up the holes in the rapidly crumbling dam of emotional detachment and sexual abstainment. Eliza s father also displays considerable aplomb in his ability to manipulate the mores of the time, albeit in largely unscripted manner (again,  with a little bit of luck  it will all work out).
However, even he falls prey to the evils of  middle class morality,  a grim and liminal space wherein the carefree mirth of low-class freeloading and the langour of the upper class privilege are both just out of reach, the only recourse being that of stolid participation in the doleful rituals of normalcy (I.e. the wedding day).
For a brief period, in the wake of his subterranean trauma, the Kim boy experiences a detached lightness, finding himself incapable of any response save laughter when exposed to the horrors of his situation. But eventually he is tugged back into the tumult by the dots and dashes of desperation, making clear his intention to rescue his father from the chthonic torments of guilt and indigence.
So to conclude, in Lady, we are told the difference in class is collapsible through the language of love. In Parasite, there is no such reassurance. Slippage will always occur at the least opportune moment and not even the most well-conducted attempt at coded communication, infiltration, and complicitous critique will change that. Or will it? Parasite 2, coming soon to a theater near you.
