20221101
LEON THE PROFESSIONAL
watched Leon the professional. it's a story about a girl and a man doing violence to the others way of life and falling in love in the process. the message is that growth is messy. transformers. apertures and peepholes. pigs, fat sweating men. the lens (scope, bifocals, television). flights of stairs, elevator shafts, crawlspaces. the cityscape and it's strange "geometries of chance". the precocious child and the childlike man (can't read can't write loves musicals). change isn't good. growth isn't good. milk, cartoons, infantility. the chest wound in the shower. dress up, dress down. blend in, or blow it all up. I will die tonight. the old mobster never had the money to give him. Gary Oldman - unpredictable, unhinged, sociopathic, messy worker. Leon - like clockwork, surgical, principled, sensitive, consummate professional. he said no children but broke his rule when he killed himself in the sacrificial act of revenge and that blood soaked patch of fertile ground became the spot where Mathildas roots could grow. the act of cleaning turned inward. he needed to unclean that she might become clean. the dirty cop I'll clean them all. no, you'll clean yourself. there's the message. you have to get dirty to become clean. you have to uproot before you can settle in. Leon as transplant. don't settle for the vicarious, watching the musical or mimicking the actors. he wanted the musical, she wanted the cartoon violence. they both got it. the clean outline on the floor, messy scribbling on the wall. childhood fears and adult realities. the grocery bag. things always escalated in her absence. delivering death. love is death. it is the cleaner s nightmare. it is a grenade, a chaotic force, the only thing that could dislodge the plant from its pot. the stylized exercise video vs the severe sit-up routine. form and function. crowded stairwells. ascent and descent. again no roots, feet off the ground, suspended above, hanging below. Mathilda shattered his terra cotta, planted him. he watered her. 
lies, the high-strung bow that wasn't (classical music that you don t hear, a violin that doesn t exist) the DEA building, the department of justice and the lawless apartment block (think Dredd). city has to be cleaned of the people who try to clean it, the real pigs are the humans. pigs, cops. sniping from a distance vs the knife. hard to wrap this one up, which is what makes it so powerful I think. there's a pedophilic undercurrent but doesn't feel indecent somehow because Leon was a child too really. both playacting. Portman was a revelation. Oldman was hammy brilliance. it was an unexpected film, full of weird angles and curves. earned pretensions. a story about a man and a girl and the violence they shared. (popular musical, high-brow classical, clashing choreographies). DEA takes the pill, Leon drinks the milk. a man, a girl, a plant, and a pig.
