20221101
ON RELIGION
Schle & Jung (first speech)
Schleiermacher's first speech from On Religion while a far cry from Jung's crisp analytical prose seems to presage many elements of Jungian thought, most notably, the split nature of man, the primacy of experience, the role of religion as a integrative force, and the necessity of the mediatorial or priest-figure (for Jung, the psychoanalyst, and for Schleiermacher, the "God-inspired person"). I was particularly struck the German theologian's theory of expansion and attraction as the dual forces at work in man (which apparently was a popular concept in the natural philosophy of the day), forming a polar relationship (the "great series") at the far extremities of which lie idealism and hedonism respectively, each tending toward self-isolation and -deprivation in an eternal cycle of (f)utility that fails to reckon with its source. Nature, however, distributes the dual urges in equal measure throughout its parts, compelling all things toward and against the center, the innermost depths, the divinely charged origin point from which springs (or through which is mediated) religious experience in all its singularity and instinctive power, and of which the cold rationalist, utilitarian moralist finds unable (because unwilling [because naturally predisposed toward unwillingness]) to conceive except as a crude instrument or vestige.

Schle & Jung (second speech)
Working thru Schleiermacher s second speech and am continuously struck by the parallels between or preanticipations of Jungian thought, particularly in his love of pairs (theoretical/practical, moral/metaphysical, attractive/expansive, speculation/praxis, individuality/multiplicity) and his positioning of religious intuition as the "necessary and indispensable third" that enables man to reckon with/sublimate his shadow (ie his inborn promethean hubris) into a larger understanding/experience of the divine unity made manifold.

Intuition
According to Schle. as I (probably incorrectly) read him, true religion (i.e. intuition of the infinite from the particular) is necessarily void of content. Or more precisely, it is itself a void through which content flows but cannot linger.
Think of a tube, whose constraints make possible the transfer of fluids from one space to another (expansion/contraction, theory/practice, multiplicity/individuality, morality/metaphysics), a mediating channel through which hydrodynamic "instincts" can become realized.
The function of the conduit is in no way dependent on the nature of the material flowing through it--it matters only that movement takes place unobstructed.
Stop it up, however, at one end or the other--attempt to convert the dynamic conduit to a static container and the contents become stagnant, lifeless, incapable of fulfilling the divine imperative toward motion.
So does the religious instinct become nothing more than "empty mythology" as soon as the immediacy of the particular instance is subordinated to abstract notions of authoritative dogma or theological system. 
Schle. does not seem to be in any way maligning the role that system plays in human life; he is simply pointing out that systematics have no place in religion. it ought not be conceived of as a body of accumulated material (mythical, doctrinal, or other), but rather as the State or Medium by which bodies are moved or made to move through impulse.

Particularity vs. Multiplicity
In thinking about Schle. I m beginning to realize that I may have misunderstood his use of  particularity  vs  multiplicity  as they relate to unity. I initially assumed the two terms were being used synonymously, but on further reflection, I think they are more accurately conceived as constitutive, which is to say the former (the particularity) functions as one of the many instances that make up the latter (the multiplicity) and by reason of its dual nature thereby gestures toward unities both greater and lesser, within and without, micro and macrocosms expanding and contracting in relation to one another

Oldenberg & Schle ("thirdplace")
Sociologist Ray Oldenburg speaks of the importance and regrettable absence of the  third place  in the modern man s life, his  home away from home  that provides a vital zone for socialization and reflection outside of home and work. 
Reading Schleiermacher s assertion of religion as the  indispensable third  that accommodates/supersedes the moralistic impulse on the one hand and the metaphysical on the other, I can t help but think of the sacred site or community as perhaps slotting into Oldenberg s framework, with moral praxis representing home life and philosophical speculation functioning as a kind of  work,  the equilibrium between which (and proper conception of which) can only be achieved through appreciation for & inhabitation of the religious zone (i.e. the seat of inspiration and instinctual participation in the divine unity made manifest/manifold). 
Not sure how or if Schleiermacher would frame religion in terms of Place, whether church or temple or perhaps nature itself (given his Romantic leanings), but it seemed like a connection worth making
