20221101
HITCHERHIKER'S GUIDE (AND JUNG)
Recently watched the old BBC adaptation of Adams  Hitchhiker s Guide. Comically low budget, but charming in its way. 
The miniseries pairs nicely with Jung s Undiscovered Self, wherein religious experience is framed as the counterbalance to the mass mindedness of state control.
On the side of freedom stands the individuated psychic encounter with and experience of symbol-made-real, word-made-flesh on the other, a rote credal conformance to the secularized banalities of statistical average. 
While Adams would seem, on the surface, to belong to that school of smug pop atheism/scientism (a la Dawkins/Hitchens), glibly disabusing the reader-viewer of any ridiculous notions about mankind s privileged place in the universe (imagine it! A talking ape! On a speck called Earth!), he also doesn t having anything particularly nice to say about the prevailing power structures that we simian speck-dwellers have constructed in place of the god we killed.
The bureaucratic incompetence displayed by his petty officials, both on the terrestrial and intergalactic level, seem to suggest not just a distaste for specific instances of human backwardness, but a genuine scorn for all manmade Systems superstitious or otherwise. You can sense the malicious glee beneath his matter of fact description of Earth s unceremonious destruction part of a highway project no less, obviously paralleling the planned demolition of protagonist Arthur Dents home at the hands of the city council.
On this point, I think Jung and Adams strike a similar note. Hitchhiker is above all a panegyric to the absurd, the outr ,  chaos at feast  or at play.
The titular encyclopedia within the world of the novel is a wildly inaccurate and imaginative text that sparks in its readers a sense of the danger, variety, and lunacy of the world around them.
While he may demythologize/divest the Man of supernatural trappings, he is still invested deeply in perhaps not the intrinsic value but at least the aleatory and bizarre qualia of individual/universal experience.
I think Jung, while certainly placing a much higher priority upon preservation of symbolic/mythic heritage, would at least have a chuckle at the Vogon bureaucrats and maybe even find evocations of sacred metaphor in the Guide s representational liberties i.e. things are other than they seem. 
In conclusion: Don t panic. The world as you think you know it may vaporize, the infrastructure crumble around you, the buttresses of mass opinion fall away, but the self remains a raw strange thing, undeniable and individual.
