20221101
WHAT WE DO IN THE SHADOWS
Finished season 3 of What We Do in the Shadows. Not as good as I remember the first season being less of the situational subtlety/absurdity that one expects from a Matt Berry (side?) vehicle (and British alt comedy in general) and more wacky gags of the US mockumentary variety. Suppose that s to be expected for any show that finds a broader audience. 
Anyhow, it got me thinking about vampirism as a metaphor for the human condition, particularly when held against that other mainstay of allegorical supernatural horror, the zombie flick.
Ligotti touched on this in Conspiracy against the Human Race, pointing both to the tradition of vampiric literature and to the notion of zombification as examples of man s split nature neither living nor dead but an unholy combination of the two,  turned  by macabre forces beyond ourcontrol and driven toward the autocannabalistic lust for flesh (the brain, the blood, the  food that talks )
While there are similarities between the zombie and the vampire, there seem to me to be instructive distinctions as well, particularly when considered in light of Jungian thought, i.e. his theory of mass mindedness vs individuation. Yes, both the zombie and the vampire are compelled by dark consumptive desires over which they have no control, but their divergent levels of awareness of this fact (a total lack on the part of brain eaters and an excess on the part of blood suckers) renders the former trite and the latter genuinely tragic. 
While the zombie operates as part of a mindless horde, seeking to consume the grey matter he no longer possesses, the vampire is keenly aware of his plight, and thus spends his days in a state of grim solitude still human by most appearances, but unable to join his fellow man in the sunlight of sociality. He is a creature of the night, pariah, embittered, powerful and sensitive. the zombie on the other hand is just a slavering bundle of decomposition.
Both could be read as shadow selves of a sort, one as nega-ego, the other as pure id, but the vampire I think comes closer to the Jungian mark insofar as he knows himself to be a monster and must grapple eternally with the existential nightmare of his parasitic existence. 
While Shadows makes light (lol) of the standard conventions of vampire media (to diminishingly comedic effect as the characters become flanderized versions of their season 1 selves) it also engages with some of the enduring themes previously mentioned: mortality, self-predation, the uncanny, etc. 
Re: the uncanny, there s Nadja s double in doll form (doll-pperganger?), an inanimate toy possessed by the spirit of its owner, functioning as an ego totem of sorts, an evocation of man as his own puppet, the Pinocchio whose nose grows inward with every lie, slowly piercing his cruelly oversized brain.
There is also Nandor s existential crisis upon learning of the Big Bang Theory and materialist determinism (ie the uncaring universe), his subsequent attempt to sublimate this  knowledge  through delusional participation in the cult of optimism (forceful extraction of the fangs, a futile attempt to extirpate his true nature and thereby salvage meaning from the endless void), and finally his decision to enter a centuries long Super Slumber vis a vis Mainlander s will to die and the antinatalist tradition as a whole. 
Ultimately however, this is a moderately successful tv show so of course our main character decides life is worth living after all, and he giddily sets off to see the world in all of its meaningless variety (eat, prey, love). very depressing. 5.5/10
