20230630
STYX
Out on the river Styx, explained our guide, careering the party along a red road that ran bumpily astride the thicketed bank, through which glimpses of the dark meandering body could here and there be caught, were any number of-- a devastating pothole clacked our teeth-- were any number of historical sights of import, and enjoyable activities for children or adults.

He pointed at a brochure taped overhead. The party shifted nervously, eyeing an oncoming bus, whose driver hailed ours--unheeded--then hurtled past with inches of clearance.  

"River Styx River Water Adventures." Unclear, I thought, how such a bad name could have come to be chosen.

We're nearly there, the driver drawled into the intercom. "We were nearly there 10 minutes ago," one of the party muttered. The others laughed gratefully for the attempt at levity. The driver glared in the rearview.

I turned to a woman with a towel around her, chewing gum, wearing cheap sunglasses with the tag still on. "You believe this?" I asked.

"Oh yeah. You've never been?"

"On the river Styx? No."

"Ah, well it's a fun time."

I looked out at the hot gray sky. "Maybe we'll get some sun finally," I offered.

"Maybe," she declined.

I'd been recently given a coupon for a "tubing experience" on this river I'd never heard of an hour's drive across the state line and--having recently entered one of my not infrequent periods of performative crisis--I decided what the hell. 

A fly in a long-abandoned web--forehead against glass, the metaphor came to me--is what I was. Mine, I knew, was to be a slow, meaningless passing, without even the satisfaction or life-affirming indignity of being a meal for some sultry many-eyed thing who might afterwards call herself my widow. No, impotent and alone, I would wriggle halfheartedly once or twice a year, imagine myself capable of something grand and significant, or at the very least something new, before once again gassing out, quieting down, remembering myself as I was and had been for some two decades now, ensconced in my silken complacency, the secretive little sufferings and comforts of a bachelor and a reasonably happy man. 

The bus squealed. Aaaand everybody out. Out we tumbled, coolers and bags and accouterments in tow. We were instructed to select a "tubular flotation dee-vice" from an unhitched trailer bed on which they were piled. A din of squeaking rubber. Exposed pillbugs rolled and scattered damply. "Look mom," some little bowl-cut terror had climbed up and was stomping them. "Bugs."  

The mother, digging sand from a small clenched mouth, grunted dispassionately. "Down."

Dragging our tubes to the river's edge, there was a grimness in the air, something imminent. The last portage of a fated platoon, death in their eyes. I could see it, the haunting footage of roughnecked men in flip flops and their trailer trash consorts, time-flecked, hollowed-out faces, slow pans set to somber fiddles and the rich intonation of MALE VOICE from every slapped together war-fetish "back then" slop-umentary you've ever seen. Pop. I jumped at a not-so-distant gunshot, sudden diegesis.

"Gun range down the way," said the guide, chuckling past me. He tossed his tube out and leapt onto it, bobbing down and away.

Chastened, I gingerly followed, lowering myself in, hissing as the frigid water touched my ass. God. I read somewhere, a study, that quiet people suffer more to cold and heat, feel more. I took comfort in that.

There was the bowl-cut kid, utterly unaffected by it, splashing in the murk and dunking his brother. "Stop. Hey." Mother already had a beer in hand, watching the Father(?) try to wedge a cooler in a tube. 

Beyond them, I saw the woman in the cheap shades, applying sunscreen on the bank, working it into herself, kneading curves. Should I...? A wave, a beckoning gesture?

But the current had already caught me and I was off, the ones ahead pulling away fast and the ones behind growing small.

I floated for awhile, cold and regretful, missing my chair and my book, earmarked where I'd left it on the sidetable. Another gunshot rang out, closer. 

What would MALE VOICE say of this--two gunshots now--of the lone recruit, deep in unfamiliar territory, adrift on death's own river, "'twixt shrouded banks, bristling and scornful?" Well, what could be said? There was no wartime correspondence, no body of work, no letters to mother or a cherry-lipped beloved--no surviving comrade to inflate with teary testimony my final heroisms. What could be said of him then, of this hapless man floating here, lacking both a battle to fight and a means to fight it?

"'Twixt shrouded banks," I repeated uneasily, making out a sign posted ahead; nailed askew to a fallen tree, it punctuated my vague run-on ruminations, gave form to them, a reptilian one, silhouetted against caution yellow. 

Arching my back, I dabbed nervously, then desperately against the water's pull, willing myself back to center, away from the shaggy overhang, and the things that drop from them, or lurk beneath them--tensed ancient jaws, eyes filmy with instinct.

Overcompensating, I erred toward the opposite bank, avoided it barely too, then back across again--terror, a minute's relief, terror--and in this zig-zag manner I made my way down a fair stretch until at last--wincing, the scratch and crackle of branches--a too-sharp bend left me clinging to a slimy trunk, sucked tight against it. 

Calming somewhat, embarrassed somewhat, I spotted a stick, sensed its potential. Yanking it loose from the snarl, I used it to push free--proud of myself, hesitantly.  

With my makeshift oar, I was able to scull a straight course, growing in confidence enough for my mind to wander back to the woman in shades, inventing unlikely occasions for chivalry: she was drowning, she was stuck, her top had come undone and I retrieved it, eyes gallantly averted. Ridiculous, these fantasies. Did other people have them? Of course. That was the benefit of reading, to be reassured that your sad little dreams were not in fact your own, but the shared property of Man. They gave testament, our books and stories, to the universality of the strange and fragile experience. 

And how fragile, I thought, following the thick oily artery of the river, down, down, past the vignettes of decay and oldblood Carnival on one side and the other: trailers on stilts, sagging and green; scum-lined dinghies docked in stagnant little inlets where cans and styrofoam stippled the shallows; past sandbar revelries, redneck Bacchus cavorting in the company of his Dixieland maenads; past the dark mouths of storm drains--or what I hoped were storm drains--emitting a sulfuric reek.

It went on like this, like a series of stills in rapid succession--time slaking, sloughing itself, bunching up in a whirring projective motion, spooled along this brimstone backwater under sepia skies, wet and mottled, montage disjunction...

[MALE VOICE]

I saw a totem pole strung with telephone lines, flying the Stainless Banner. 

I saw a lawn jockey in a tree stand, defaced like an old god. 

I saw Robert E. Lee in a mobility scooter, cursing, ensnared in kudzu.

I saw, I see myself in ragged grays, a breechloader on my shoulder, hunched and creeping at the flanks--steady men--a sharp flicking past the ears, ffttt, thudding dully an inch off the mark. Blankness, euphoria, then the sick churning of realization, a backward misstep on the scree, tumbling, scrambling, mad animal flight. Ffftt. fffttt. Flickering fast now, silver halide washing out red, the chemical wetness, burnthrough.... a bugle call, distorted, reverberant, then the roar of engagement; men hot for death, marked for it. 

----

A dragonfly landed on my knee, tickling return to present. I smacked at it, looked around. The sun was sinking low; my tube was too, a slow leak from the snag no doubt.

Coming round yet another bend, in the gloaming, I saw the shape of two men in lawn chairs on a point bar, a small lantern at their feet. I clambered out and over to them, my feet sinking deep in the slick pluff of the riverbed. The tube trailed behind me like a limp skin.

"Heya," said one of the men around his dangling cigarette. Approaching him, his [cheekbones] deepened in the lantern light, skeletal. 

"Hey. I'm--" What to even say. "You know where the return point is? For, the river tour. Adventure." 

The man shrugged. "Man, I guess it's a mile back. Or a mile up. You want a cig."

I took one, consigned to the weirdness of it. The lighter flicked.

"So," I took a drag, coughed. Frogs were croaking loudly from the wings in tenuous unison. We watched silently as the last red wound on the western sky congealed and blackened. 

"It's like with Zeus and them." The man said it with authority. His friend remained mute.

"It's like what?" I hadn't smoked in years; it hit me, vertiginous. 

"Like with Zeus and them." He gestured at the river, black and chuckling. "The myths."

Smoke wreathed his face. I groped for something, anything to hang this moment on, a reference point, a precedent. The fissure widened below--yawning, sheer--an infinite strangeness, things slipping away from themselves, caught between banks a universe across, mirrored doubly, trebly, a thousand times over, then shattered at last on the punctum of the bugle's sanguine call.

"I guess it is," I finally said.