20240803
The Elementary Particle: Sex, Space, Science and God

The presence of God, a great distance away, gave form, substance, and meaning to the world and--separately--to our place in it. attempts to reach him were geographical, navigational, pilgrimages across treacherous moral terrain, too vast to be traversed in a single lifetime, and so we must propagate, make more of ourselves. but in so doing, we increase the distance, reinscribing the mutative influence of our carnal nature, losing whatever ground we gained.

then came materialism, it sucked God from the sky, an ancient aborted fetus, leaving a gaping womb, an impersonal void, eternal and unspeakably vast. we had nowhere to go, and nothing to be, and yet mechanisms of desire were still at work in us. we wandered but with no destination, we fucked and bred but with no great hope to pass on.

the emergence of positivism grounded us somewhat; it still operated within the materialist framework in that what was "real" still lay beyond the human, but it not inexorably out of reach. it was at our fingertips, in our noses and eyes. the primacy of sensation gave us permission to be small bodies in great spaces and gave purpose to the interchange: to know the void, to sense it, measure it. a reason to fuck.

but there was Einstein; he troubled the waters, suggesting that reason by way of experience, though reliable enough on a human scale, falters at both the atomic and cosmic levels. it does not constitute an absolute, nothing does, only the hard limit of lightspeed. we dissolved again, reduced to the elementary, positive of nothing.

nevertheless, things happen, we see them, we know them; we "act as if," desperately, subjectified within an inch of our lives. sex becomes the only way to reclaim some sense of objectness, to exert control, however illusory, over time (becoming young again through offspring) and over distance (pulling the lover close, two as one). it becomes the new religion, sex does, offering a unitive vision wherein we are the gods, larger than ourselves, pulsing, generative. the void become but a space for ever more ridiculous tantric permutations. 

this does not hold, cannot hold. and, says the quantum physicist (troubling believer, positivist and hippie alike) the reason is that _there is nothing that is not observed_, no God in heaven, no infinite void, no nirvana, no final mort, petit or otherwise. once we see it, it is. until then, it is not. quantum states can be predicted, certainly, with an extraordinary degree of precision, but only if one is able to divest oneself of cherished notions of something beyond, to collapse the eternal yardstick against which man has always held himself, proudly measuring out his heroisms, his sacrifices, his romances, his dreams, down to the stifling constraints of the immediate field of view.

big pills are no problem, we will choke them down happily, asphyxiate with a smile on our face. but this one, the quantum pill, was far too small. and that, Houellebecq implicitly suggests, is why we are miserable. 

we are mutants in the sewer of desire, dreaming of a life above ground beneath a boundless sky. but of course we cannot get there until we relinquish the desire to get there.  if we could but observe a new human, ready made, beyond sex and the ravages of time, perhaps it would be so.