20240629
as a child, feeling safe was the sublime joy. a rainy day, the smell of something baking, the murmur of a television. Or the sun low in the sky on a drive back from some event or other, buckled up forehead against the window. or your mother putting her hand and to your head, "you're warm." or your father: "we'll figure it out."

what is comparable now, as an adult, grown beyond illusions of domestic safety, of the world as a kind and ordered place? a father God, a mother spirit? a home beyond the clouds? amplified projections of those early sense memories? likely.

but what of the troubled child, who has no such memory bed to rest upon, no loam of parental care from which to grow a spiritual sense? what of them? does not their plight cast doubt on the accidental nature of our optimisms, dependent as they are on experiences we just as easily may never have had?

undoubtedly. whether these doubts are well-founded is another question. institution says no. the zealous practitioner says no. all of our societal buttressing says, desperately, no, no--there is safety in the city, in the nation, in the bosom of progress. 

and yet by the very nature of these protestations against doubt--insistent, plaintive--Man betrays himself, reveals himself a child still, an aging vessel for the flame of nascence, reenactor of the fond recollection.

to those who lack the common ground, the conforming spirit, the stomach for such indulgent shadowplay in the light of some distant happiness--whether real or imagined, future or past--there is no alternative but a new worship, a black flame, a void instead of a God. 

to embrace the existential threat as one would a mother, to find safety in the absoluteness of death: this becomes the exile's creed. so does the occult cyst form below and beyond the town center. and so does the child become its own twin, one evil and one good, each orphaned from itself, lost and toddling about, weary as time, with no one to put him to bed.