20241206
The Green Knight is the undying king, the implacable force of decay/growth by which all things rise and fall.

The Green Chapel is the seat of power, the throne at the heart of the world.

The Christmas Game is a declaration of accession, Gawain making known his intent/desire to rule with the aging king's blessing.

The green girdle is Gawain's uncertainty and fear, sublimated in the mother complex and attachment more generally, supposedly a ward against death (but in actuality just a death sentence delayed, and perhaps worsened).

The long journey is the procession route, a series of visions and trials and divestitures that must occur by way of archetypal encounters with: the thief, the saint/queen, the giant, the fox, the host, the temptress. dense tapestry of symbol.

Christmas is Coronation Day.

Having shed material attachments, Gawain must finally lose his attachment to his own head, his own self, before he is fit to wear the crown. He must bend the knee to death before the kingdom will bend knee to him. "The King is dead! Long live the King!"

-------


unproven, the young knight, and heir apparent, languishes
the Mother summons the king's double (green as occult fire), who issues challenge and bares his neck in sport--on Christmas Day no less
wielding the King's sword, Gawain hews head from shoulders (red blood berries on winter's bough), winning glory, not for the act itself but for the act in light of certain recompense. 

departure at the appointed time, bearing protective garments, most notably, the green girdle. This is attachment, a ward against a death, which as we discover is merely a sentence delayed (and worsened by delay).

Gawain must endure a series of trials and visions, divestitures and consecerations, to test his resolve. 

The Green Chapel, is of course, the throne--the seat of the world. The Green Knight is, of course, the Undying King.

The journey is, of course, the long procession train. Christmas is Coronation Day.

To wear the crown is to lose one's head. 

PLOT POINTS 
the Christmas game
a kindness
st. Winifred
interlude (mushrooms, giants)
the host
the beheading at the green chapel
return journey

SYMBOLS
the girdle
the upside down image
the sword

FIGURES
the giants
the mother
the queen
the saint
the host
the temptress/lover
the fox
the thief