20241031
THE PIANO
A dark, melancholic film, so pregnant with meaning you nearly see it crowning. Metaphor sits heavily upon the narrative, squashes it flat to the dimension of fable or macabre folklore. I.e., the details of the protagonist s situation and the character of the protagonist herself matter far less than the environment in which she finds herself, the objects she interacts with, and the archetypes she embodies/encounters/is beset by.
This is intentional, no doubt, as suggested by the occurrence of a local shadow play, in which significantly Bluebeard brandishes a comically large key, before murdering his wife in pantomime (and nearly getting murdered himself in real life by the  savages  [the audience?]). 
By playing with shadows in this way, the film positions itself as commentary on artifice, the ways that we reenact past traumas and project them on our interior canvases or staff lines (the  silent  table) a muting, a reduction, a flattening. 
This is what, I think, the piano stands in as an artifact of pain and loss that the protagonist must jettison before she is to find her true voice. 
The chopping off of fingers is also significant in this regard (and also hearkens back to the shadowplay from before, in preparation for which the drama/trauma/thaumaturgist makes as if to attack a hesitant participant s hand with a prop axe), insofar as it signifies the violent act of lessening that must occur in order to make real that which has been long sublimated. 
You will not emerge from the swamp without leaving some piece of you behind, some appendage or baggage, but in so doing by enduring the great trial, cutting loose the weights of the past you regain that part of yourself which the thing merely symbolized.
It s transactional in this sense sex for love, the body for the soul, the ivory keys for the keys to the heart. (Recall: Ada s forbidden lover later, as they are rowing away from the island and Ada suddenly expresses her desire to cast the piano overboard, says  but I have the key, we can fix it  [or something to that effect].)
The piano stood in for Voice, but it was not Voice itself. The object must sink that the Subject may swim or, perhaps, drown trying, lost in voiceless depths.
