20240531
SEVERANCE
The man at the bar was reasonably certain his dog was trying to communicate with him, and had been for some time. 
"I saw a look in his eye that was human." 
Severance looked over at the man at the bar and shook his head. "That can't be true." 
"He arranges objects in uncanny ways. Errant toys and bones and household items."
"I don't think that's possible." 
"He makes water discreetly and at regular intervals."
"I don't think that's possible." Severance signalled to the bartender. "What's it got to with anything? Passing water."
"He passes water on the hour. It's uncanny."
"That's nonsense. Another beer."
"Come over on Sunday night and I'll show you and you can be the judge."
Severance shrugged and drank in silence. He and the man both stood up at the same time to leave.
***
Sunday night, Severance came around with a bottle of wine. The dog was sleeping on a chair, raised an eye at him. 
"Well I'm here." 
"Yep. This is the dog. Here boy." 
The dog climbed stiffly down with the air of an alderman went to the bookshelf and nosed a volume.
"See that? He's aware and capable." 
 Never mind that.  
 See? These are the archives.  The man thumbed several pages in.  April 15, a message was recieved. Bones of a bird, unmistakably cruciform. Intentional. 
Severance looked at the dog and then the man.  That s nothing.  
 Listen. April 18, another message in bones. 3 lizards, their skeletons carefully articulated. 
 Mm. Where should I put this wine.  Severance went to the kitchen and began rummaging through the empty cabinets.
 Anywhere. Listen. May 1, discovery of an old shed north of the creek. Dilapidated.  The dog began to whine and pace.  Contents included nests, bones. Smell of piss and shit.  
Severance came back with mason jars to pour in.  You never told me you had land. 
 Family land, twenty acres of it. Thank you.  The man sipped.  What kind of name is Severance anyway. 
 Never mind that. Take me to this shed. 
***
It was 9 o clock when they reached it, holding lanterns and high-stepping through the knee-deep kudzu.
 See? That s the place. Here boy.  
The dog barked furiously and ran inside. The men followed to see it pissing in a corner, staring. 
  Left corner, unusual. That could be indicative.  The man took out his notebook.
 You re making something of nothing. You re imposing meaning.  Severance knelt down, picked up an old bottlecap. On the underside, it read,  You have won! 
Like an angel from god, the dog leapt out at him; lantern shattered and the place went up in flames. It took 10 days and crews from three counties to put it out.
