20241203
nosferatu is, in every sense, a film about death and sex. it is about man's relationship to death and sex, and to the 'myserious workings of nature,' in the words of the Paracelsian, and to the 'horror' with which we view them.
despite the reliance on stationary cameras and static shots (an intentional decision, by the way, since, as best i can tell, camera movement was well within the technological capabilities of early 20's cinema), the film is highly dynamic and vehicular, a series of trespasses. by which i mean, it first brings us over the treacherous terrain separating man from death (or city from forest) by horse and cart, and then it brings death over the selfsame barrier, in ship and coffin. there is also the sexual trespass, which i'll address soon.
Nosferatu loading his cart with infested dirt, to answer his thrall knock's invitation, is a catastrophic indictment of private property.
death abides in the dirt, or--more precisely--in the containment of the dirt as parcel, coffin- or contract-bound. 
count orlok is possessed of supernatural speed (as are all who carry their deaths with them, and eat fear).
but per the foreshadowing of hutter's cautionary act I run-in with unnamed gentleman on the streets of wisborg, we cannot outrun our fate, or outclimb our fall, or outbuild our dereliction.
no matter the castle's scale, we are of men low estate, flies in the jaws of a carnivorous plant (the flower that kills; for instructive contrast, see the bouquet)
so there is motion by land, but what of by sea? at risk of innuendo, 'it's not the size of the ship.' That slow shot through knock's prison window of the corrupted vessel entering the ill fated harbor is the sex act and the death act.
Nosferatu--verminous, licentious, ancient, is Frankenstein in reverse. it is not righteous vengeance on his maker he seeks, but occultic ecstatic release at the hands of his unmaker, i.e., the innocent maiden.
man has not wronged nature; nature has wronged man, or: man has wronged himself through natural means and cannot (for fear of fear) see the soteriology inscribed in every dawn and cannot (for din of drum) hear the deathbird's call for what it is rather than what it purports or is purported to be. 
the feminine, only the feminine, has this capacity. Ellen is christ, and Hutter Mary. 
to give oneself to death freely, to bare the heart/neck willingly, to fuck the world's dark spectre, to embrace the horror of sex and time is to reveal said horror as: a puff of smoke, a phantome.
***
Finished nosferatu.
'one viewed with horror the mysterious workings of nature...'
i got angry today, not at you or myself even, but at sex and the nature of sex. It felt poisonous again to me, and vampiric.
But then I learned or remembered the act v lesson that turns away cloud and plague, and it is sacrifice. 
i sacrifice my fear of sacrifice and embrace you, dead. 
nosferatu is the antipode of frankenstein. the latter shows man corrupting nature, the former nature corrupting man (and wishing it didnt have to)
death wants to die but man's fear of it keeps it alive. only the willing victim can restore fallen nature.
nosferatu sought out ellen, the only one who could kill him because thats what he wanted.
at first she petulantly scolded hutter for killing the beautiful flowers. little did she know the flowers must die so that the symbol might live in the form of the proferred bouquet.
blood is life! yes, knock...the estate agent, who deals in rotten land and rotten deals. you serve a dead master. 
ellen is christ, count orlok is prometheus, knock is the spider woman, hutter is saul/paul, the paracelsian is the viewer.
sex is death act willingly undertaken, a stake through the weary, cruel heart of the world. 
no tracking shots means better, bolder composition