20250705
"okay shitfuckers. we have to build a temple using the shit from our ass." the father pulled aside his robes and made as if to squat but lost balance, toppling fatly. 

The initiates stifled laughter, coughed with false gravity under the reddened glare of the fallen ecclesiast. They went then to the task, baring hole and spreading cheek in the manner appointed.

"and then shalt thou a puckering make, 
 with great travail and solemn mien, 
from thy ass a coiled snake
and in thy bowels a loosening"

All knew the text by heart, had recited it countless times since first they took the vow of the Brown Order, the cause and manner of its recital ranging variously from that of constipatiatory penance to reverential outpourings--diarrhoeaic in nature--to the mindless mud-piety of the morning's Defecation, during which all betook themselves in turn to the communal Rectalry and traced upon the wall the sacred words with the dung of the prior Excretant. 

All knew the text and yet, there among them one who doubted, the father himself.

"why shouldn't I piss also?" he muttered, struggling to his feet. it was forbidden, of course, the Yellow Path, as had been decreed by the Shatican in no uncertain terms and with the vehemence that the severity of the heresy demanded.

So unilateral, categorical was the Poop's condemnation of the Pissants that in addition to the semi-regular enshytlicals railing against the heretical streams of thought that flowed (like "a bilirubinous Plague") with concerning rapidity from the UTIslands ("the calcific stones in the Guts of our Holy Duodenum")--wherein the Europeean Union had established its shaky hold--a series of "Urinary Tracts" had been distributed widely as well, and added to the brother's ever-growing list of required reading (stoolwork as it was colloquially known), with such edifying titles as "The Bladder's Bite" and "To Clamp or Catheterize? Proposed Measures Against a Impulse Most Foule."

Such polemics he, the father (John was his name), esteemed but lightly. Having himself been a penile incontinent prone to shameful episodes in his early years within the novitiate--a particularly humiliating nocturnal instance of which nearly resulted in his expulsion not only from the order but from the Crappethian territories at large--he was keenly sympathetic to the pissant's plight and less vociferous by far in his excoriation of the water-makers than were his peers.

Indeed, it was this and this alone that had prevented him from penetrating the rarified bowels of the Order, those rich mahogany interior of the Duodenum wherein lay the fragrant delectations of status and rank. Many a visiting dignitary or church Orificial was shocked to find a  of his age and experience in so lowly a post as mere father of a outland monastery.

Yet here he was, and here he would remain, with as much dignity as his formidable girth and irascible nature permitted, to guide the brothers in their daily travails, and to assist them therein. 

It would a hard day; a forthcoming visit from the Archdook and his entourage loomed ever nearer; preparations were many and laborious, not least among which was the erection of a "Temple" or ceremonial latrine--more a perfunctory gesture than a strict requirement, but not one that it would do to forego.

So on they labored, plucking the turds from their beleaguered holes, forming bricks therewith, or a kind of mortar, as the consistency of the excreta allowed. On a nearby table lay fibrous vegetals of Expedience and Softening, whose firstfruits were selected from the monastic garden and whose fertilization was accomplished by the very substance the continued production of which said produce did enable. Such was the meditative theme of many of a long night's compulsory genuflection for those disobedentiaries or recalcitrants who were found to be remiss in their doodies.

Father John munched a celery, lost in thought. Why the aversion? he thought. Is it not mere water, which not even the High Theo-log himself could dispute was to some degree present, and at times undeniably apparent, in the Fecal Substance? 

Blasphemy, he knew. And yet, and yet. Could not this Yellow Taint--which plagues all who squat beneath the sun, be they pissant or pontiff--be employed, in light of ubiquity and impossibility of avoidance, as a means of roundabout furtherance toward, even confraternity with, the most Holey End? Might not it not contain within its defilements some measure, however small, of the Good? 

A hardened pebble-like turd struck him square in his tonsure's center. He wheeled about furiously, a sharp remonstrance at the ready, but found to his dismay, all brother engaged assiduously in the task at hand--none of the telltale smirks or sniggers or intimations of playful malfeasance.

Then, eyes bulging in sudden horror (or was it awe), he spotted what could only be the perpetrator, some distance off, where the far mudbank, fly-flecked and steaming, met the copse at clearing's edge.

Blonde of hair and gold-bedecked, there stood a man, some six feet tall, his formidable member firmly in hand, wearing about him an air of such tranquility and utter self-possession as never had or could be seen among the abnegatory brown ranks. Kindness marked his features, which even from such a distance, Father John could not help but note were unusually handsome--delicate even, and not without a kind of wry mischief. 

But, a downward glance again, Holy Mudder, the size of it! 

It twitched, beckoning him.

He felt himself drawn, as if by pulled by a third hand or arm, toward the great white protuberance, from which there proceeded, first in spurts, then in a mighty glittering stream, clear as a mountain rivulet, the forbidden ichor.

His mouth went dry--time and distance collapsed. Staggering forward, he fell to his knees beneath the ablutory onslaught, lapping like a hungry dog.

"Drink, my child" came a voice, like that of many waters, clear as Heaven's bells, sonorous as the sea. "Drink, drink. This do in remembrance of pee."

Father John wept, there, deeply, in the unabated torrent, a salty comingling such as might flood the world again, its enshitted principalities, coprolitic powers, washed clean in Noahic consanguinity. Some say he weeps there still.